Welcome back to Gary's economics, today we're going
to talk about economic predictions in the media
okay so we started this channel two years
ago and the very first thing we did was did
a video about Covid predicting how it
was going to affect the economy and in
that video we said that a huge amount of
money would be given from the governments
to the rich that would cause a huge increase
in inequality a huge increase in house prices
a huge increase in inflation and basically
a cost of living crisis for ordinary people
so here we are two years later and we can see all
of that stuff has happened and the question that
it raises is if all those predictions were right then
why is nobody in the media talking now about how
so much money has been transferred from the
government to the rich and the super rich and
this raises really interesting questions about
making predictions in economics and in the media
so back when I was a trader there was a very very
heavy incentivization to be to be right and I had
a very good track record as a trader and I made
some predictions that were right and within two
three years of me starting working as a trader
I became pretty famous and pretty well known
and very well paid in that industry because I was
making predictions that were consistently correct
um but now in the media you know at the beginning
of Covid I was because my background was trading
I tried really hard to make a lot of clear
predictions about what was going to happen
because I feel like a lot of people in the media
just say whatever they like and they're not really
very clear about what they actually believe so
I made a lot of clear predictions that if you go
back and read my early articles for 'Open Democracy'
or watch my first video on this channel you'll
see that those predictions all came correct now
at the same time 'The Guardian' which is obviously
a massive newspaper their Chief economics
correspondent Larry Elliott wrote an article
saying that Covid is going to make house prices
collapse now we can obviously see in hindsight
that his prediction was wrong and we can see
in hindsight that my predictions were right
but what punishment is there for Larry
Elliott of the Guardian for being wrong
and what reward is there for me being right
well really there's none basically because the
media is not like trading if you're a trader and
you're right all the time you get paid a million
pound; if you're a trader and you're wrong all
the time you get fired. If you're in the media
and you're right, a year later nobody remembers
and if you're in the media and you're wrong
a year later nobody remembers. Now the problem
with this is it creates a situation where if
you are a really good Economist and you keep
making correct predictions the media will not
generally push you to the front and if you are an
economist who works in the media and you're bad
and you make very bad predictions nobody's ever
going to call you out so what this means is if
you are a really good Economist and you want to
explain to people what's happening in the media
how do you do it how does the media determine who
gets the important jobs and and who gets ignored
well if you don't have a system that actively
finds the good people and actively discourages
the bad people basically you're going to end up
with the people who know the right people getting
into the best jobs, you're going to end up in a
situation where it kind of becomes a posh Boys
club where everybody went to the same school and
everybody knows each other because that's the only
way to get in so if you're a really good Economist
you turn up on the trading floor, you're right year
after year, within a year you'll be famous you do
that in the media you probably won't get noticed
and it creates this problem where very good
economists can be very well rewarded in financing
and trading but they'll generally be ignored in
the media and it will be the same in government
what this means is the people who are
supposed to be protecting our economy
economists in academia, in journalism,
in government, in central banking
basically have no incentivization to actually
be correct; nobody ever goes back and checks and
hindsight their homework the end result is most
of these guys chat nonsense most of the time
um if that's the situation that you have you can't
really be surprised when the economy that we end
up with is very weak. So what I would suggestis
that economists who are in very powerful positions
like for example working at the Bank of England
or senior professors at Oxford or senior jobs
in the media, I think they should be forced to
make predictions and you know those predictions
can say look if this happens then that will
happen if that happens then this will happen
but if they're not forced to make predictions then
there's no way we have of no one who's good and
who's bad so I think we should force them to make
predictions and then go back in hindsight and see
who was right and who was wrong and that will give
us an opportunity to find the best economists and
put them into the best positions because as it is
at the moment we've pretty much got a situation
where anyone who's a really good Economist is
going to go and work in the city; and journalism
and central banking end up being a posh boys
club and that's not good for society okay enjoy